week five notes

PODCAST

    what gets counted counts
    module 2: modify kobotoolbox thing to record data better
    Dr. Colleen Morgan
        -drawing is an important skill
        -indirect investigation and playful approaches
    Dr. Ben Carter
        -tens of thousands of charcoal hearths - wow!
        -outward facing websites for the public
        -"initially I thought digital archaeology would be an efficient way to record data - I don’t think that any more, it’s not particularly efficient. What it is, is, as long as you put in the time and effort... you can get some really clean data and that is particularly important."

Ontologies of the Future and Interfaces for All: Archaeological Databases for the Twenty-First Century. 
https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/Ontologies_of_the_Future_and_Interfaces.pdf

    Despite  their  importance  and  ubiquity,  archaeological  databasesystems are rarely the subject of theoretical analysis within the discipline dueto  their  ‘‘black  box’’  nature  and  the  perceived  objectivity  of  computerizedsystems.
    A  database  is  any  systematized  assemblage  of  data  points.  Technically,  thisis  different  from  the  database  management  system,  which  is  the  frameworkused to create and interface  with the database.
    Because many archaeological methods are destructive, databases serve asimportant  archives  of  former  states  of  being.
    During  theeighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the amassing of archives was an integralcomponent of nation-building and colonization, which objectified collectivememory and entrusted an emergent class of experts to steward these materi-als in service to the national mythos (Hutton1993:151; Labrador and Chilton2009:2).
    Although  archaeological  theories  have  moved  beyond  objective,  expertempiricism,  and our database technologies have evolved from paper ledgersand  punchcards,  it  is  not  clear  whether  our  methods  of  employing  dat-abases  have  changed  all  that  much.
    Yet, as Hutton has noted, the socialpower  of  an  archive  extends  beyond  legitimating  expert  authority  or  deter-miningwhatis  to  be  remembered  about  the  past—the  naturalization  ofarchives  has  actually  structuredhowmemory  is  formed  (Hutton1993:151;Labrador and Chilton2009:2).
    Thus,  the  cataloguing  and  data-entry  process  have  impacts  uponhow we see  our  data and  how we predetermine  future  modes of  access  andinterpretation.
    Classificatory  systemsseek to maximize similarity  and minimize  difference  to create  order.
    You  need  to  know  the  full  distribution  of  patterns  before  deciding  which  artifacts  can  be  lumped  together  or  split  apart.In the absence  of complete ontological knowledge, systems may suffer from‘‘reverse  bootstrapping,’’  whereby  the  perceived  anomalies  are  downplayedif  not ignored  completely  (Bowker2000:650).
    Metadata  standardsintentionally  set limits—recognizing certain features while excluding others.We should keep in mind that creating such standards is an ethical and oftenpolitical act, and one that cannot be taken lightly.
    For  instance,  ‘‘organic’’  or  collaborative  tagging  as  a  form  of  classifica-tion  has  grown  especially  popular  among  user-driven  websites  where  usersdefine  and  apply  their  own  descriptive  labels  (i.e.  tags)  to  data  objects,resulting  in  emergent  ‘‘folksonomies’’  (Vander  Wal2007)  that  reveal  andproduce  communities  of  practice.
    Such  systems  acknowledge  that  data  are  valuable  in  terms  of  contem-porary  significance  and  shared  inferred  meanings  (Vander  Wal2007)  thathave  power  to  signify  emergent  user  collectives.  Inviting  an  audience  to  tag is one  small, albeit  potentially  significant,  step  toward  sharing  the  power  ofexpertise.
    My  third  prediction  is  that  archaeological  databases  will  experiment  withnew  ways  of  structuring  knowledge  representations  to  better  model  thecomplexity  of  social  life.
    Experiments combining community-driven ‘‘fluid ontologies’’ (Srinivasanand Huang2005) with human-centered user interface design have begun toexplore  how  alternative  worldviews  can  be  better  mediated  and  representedto  serve  specific  communities  of  users  such  as  descendants  and  memory-keepers.  For  instance,  the  technical  specification  for  the  ‘‘ontologically-flat’’multimedia  tool  of  TAMI  (Text,  Audio,  Movies,  Images),  was  developed  inresponse to attempts at representing Aboriginal knowledge structures in dig-ital archives in Australia (Christie2004; Indigenous Knowledge and ResourceManagement  in  Northern  Australia2006).  Rather  than  determining  andencoding an Aboriginal data model at the start of the project, TAMI’s devel-opers  propose  completely  flattening  the  data  structure  so  as  to  remove  allprior   assumptions   about   the   world   and   designing  a   graphical   interfacewhereby  indigenous  users  could  intuitively  create  their  own  relationships,labels,  metadata,  queries,  and  meanings  within  the  system  (Christie2004).TAMI’s  users,  who  would  include  Aboriginal  teachers,  parents,  and  elderscould create ‘‘local memory databases,’’ encoding the larger archive with per-sonally  meaningful  collections  of  heritage  data  whose  cultural  significancethey  communicate  to  younger  generations:  their  students,  children,  andgrandchildren  (Christie2004;  Verran2007).
    In  other  words,these  researchers  are  treating  uncertainty,  bias,  variance,  and  anomalies  aswelcome  sources  of  knowledge  rather  than  pesky  ‘‘errors’’  to  diminish  oreliminate  from  statistical  models.

Teaching Open Science: Published Data and Digital Literacy in Archaeology Classrooms
https://www.cambridge.org/core/services/aop-cambridge-core/content/view/8404682E019727CCF43416B81E4E9092/S2326376818000050a.pdf/teaching_open_science_published_data_and_digital_literacy_in_archaeology_classrooms.pdf

    University classrooms, then, become a critical opportunity to ensure that future generations of archaeologists are comfortable with information management systems, thick/long data (Arbesman 2013; Wang 2013), and how to address the benefits and challenges of designing and managing digital data research projects.
    As open-access resources are increasingly drawn upon to fill in these voids, students, particularly at the graduate level, find themselves responsible for advanced digital data and information management tasks that they may not feel prepared for.
    Teaching with real case studies is always more relevant than using fake data, providing realistic experiences of the imperfections and complexities of archaeological evidence.
    Promoting digital data reuse means new tools, skills, professional roles, and communication standards, transforming most steps in the research process, from funding to workflow to citation (Kansa 2012:510). At the same time, the constant and rapid innovation of the Web environment challenges archaeologists to keep pace with active and thoughtful evolution of practice, infrastructure, and ethics policies (Kansa 2010:12).
    By analyzing other researchers’ primary data, the importance of data compatibility and sufficient metadata becomes obvious, which is rare when working with faunal reports (secondary, interpreted data)—that is, of course, when the students are able to find open primary data online related to their research questions.
    Undergraduate students find it difficult to appreciate that the present availability of online data is a major improvement from just a few years ago, when all data could still only be retrieved through personal connections and time-consuming archival and library research (if possible, as most zooarchaeological reports are in gray literature).
    Technically advanced concepts such as linked data, application programming interfaces, GeoJSON data, and so on quickly overwhelmed students. These elements and data formats, however, are critical to what has been termed “Mash-Up-Ready” Data—that is, content that can easily be used in different applications or combined with other sources (Kansa 2010:12; Kansa, Elliott, et al. 2010) to pursue original research questions.
    Finally, the expansion of open-access textbooks and educational resources complements the ethos of openness, increases the potential to produce high-quality media communicating open data and digital archaeology practice and theory to students, and is, indeed, imperative.
    , ASU students were quick to grasp the importance of DINAA as an example of comprehensive vocabulary and why such a tool is now necessary. One student stated: “Another thing that I would like to see improved is the vast inconsistencies in terms. Every project innovating their own terminology makes extracting data from DINAA a nightmare.”3
    As an online environment, ODATE proposes to create an e-textbook accompanied by a digital laboratory to engage students in what Graham defines as the essence of digital archaeology: “the creative use of primarily open-source and/or open-access materials to archive, reuse, visualize, analyze and communicate archaeological data” (2017).
    Although progress has been made in dismantling the ivory tower, there is still a long way to go toward recognizing that classrooms and students are not isolated but, rather, deeply entangled in professional and public attitudes toward open science and the legislation and policy that structure data publishing.
    The values of sustainability and reuse have long been threads in archaeological practice and thought, but now, more than ever, we need critical and creative solutions.
    The alignment of training programs with these recent technological developments can only be achieved with (1) systems of curriculum scaffolding for progressive skills development; (2) the production of high-quality, routinely updated resources and case studies detailing methods, theory, and results; (3) training for instructors and professionals; and (4) enhanced communication and collaboration between diverse avenues and roles pursued by archaeologists today.
    As a complex ecosystem, archaeology is a tangled web of researchers, instructors, students, and now, more than ever, information management teams, governments, and community stakeholders; our strength will come from collectively challenging, engaging, integrating, and collaborating on building foundational skills, method, and theory for the future of reuse in archaeology.
    
4. “What Gets Counted Counts”
https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/h1w0nbqp/release/2

    pay attention to: how does system design affect knowledge creation
    “What gets counted counts,” feminist geographer Joni Seager has asserted, and Munir is one person who understands that. What is counted—like being a man or a woman—often becomes the basis for policymaking and resource allocation. By contrast, what is not counted—like being nonbinary—becomes invisible (although there are also good reasons for being invisible in some contexts, and we’ll come back to those shortly).
    Without quantitative research, Oakley explains, “it is difficult to distinguish between personal experience and collective oppression.”
    But additional research by information studies scholar Rena Bivens has shown that below the surface, Facebook continues to resolve users’ genders into a binary: either “male” or “female.” Evidently, this decision was made so that Facebook could allow its primary clients—advertisers—to more easily market to one gender or the other. Put another way, even if you can choose the gender that you show to your Facebook friends, you can’t change the gender that Facebook provides to its paying customers (figure 4.3).
    And while the gender binary is one of the most widespread classification systems in the world today, it is no less constructed than the Facebook advertising platform or, say, the Golden Gate Bridge. The Golden Gate Bridge is a physical structure; Facebook ads are a virtual structure; and the gender binary is a conceptual one. But all these structures were created by people: people living in a particular place, at a particular time, and who were influenced—as we all are—by the world around them.
    A simple solution might be to say, “Fine, then. Let’s just not classify anything or anyone!” But the flaw in that plan is that data must be classified in some way to be put to use. In fact, by the time that information becomes data, it’s already been classified in some way. Data, after all, is information made tractable, to borrow a term from computer science. “What distinguishes data from other forms of information is that it can be processed by a computer, or by computer-like operations,” as Lauren has written in an essay coauthored with information studies scholar Miriam Posner. And to enable those operations, which range from counting to sorting and from modeling to visualizing, the data must be placed into some kind of category—if not always into a conceptual category like gender, then at the least into a computational category like Boolean (a type of data with only two values, like true or false), integer (a type of number with no decimal points, like 237 or −1), or string (a sequence of letters or words, like “this”).
    Bowker and Star give the example of the public debates that took place in the 1990s around the categories of race employed on the US Federal Census. At issue was whether people should be able to choose multiple races on the census form. Multiracial people and their families were some of the main proponents of the option, who saw it as a way to recognize their multiple identities rather than forcing them to squeeze themselves into a single, inadequate box. Those opposed included the Congressional Black Caucus as well as some Black and Latinx civil rights groups that saw the option as potentially reducing their representative voice. Ultimately, the 2000 census did allow people to choose multiple races, and millions of people took advantage of it. But the debates around that single category illustrate how classification gets complicated quickly, and with a range of personal and political stakes.
    This is a clear example of what we term the paradox of exposure: the double bind that places those who stand to significantly gain from being counted in the most danger from that same counting (or classifying) act.
    Here it’s not that the scanning machines rely upon an insufficient number of categories, as in the case of Mikey the Cub Scout, or that they employ the wrong ones, as Mikey’s mom would likely say. It’s that the TSA scanners shouldn’t rely on gender to classify air travelers to begin with. (And while we’re going down that path, how about we imagine a future without a state agency that systematically pathologizes Black women and trans people and Cub Scouts in the first place?)
    As data scientists, what should we do amid these potential harms? Depending on the circumstances and the institution that is doing the collecting, the most ethical decision can vary. It might be to avoid collecting data on whether someone is cis or transgender, to make all gender data optional, to not collect gender data at all, or even to stick with binary gender categories.
    Their colleagues at the Guardian recently adopted this latter strategy in their interactive piece “Does the New Congress Reflect You?” about the 2018 US midterm elections. The piece presents three categories: cis male, cis female, and trans + nonbinary. When you click on “trans + nonbinary,” as in figure 4.7, the interactive map displays all of the districts in grey, because “0 people in Congress are like you.” The absence of data becomes an important takeaway, as meaningful as the data themselves.
    It’s also increasingly acknowledged that that sex, like gender, and sometimes together with gender, is multilayered and continuously unfolding throughout a person’s life.
    We have already introduced the idea of the paradox of exposure where people are harmed by being made visible to a system. But because system designers from dominant groups do not experience the harms of being counted or of being made visible without consent—this is the privilege hazard, once again—they rarely anticipate these needs or account for them in the design process. This is the reason that questions about counting must be accompanied by questions about consent, as well as of personal safety, cultural dignity, and historical context.
    The creation of the corpus enables these important activists to be counted, as well as have their words (as recorded in the meeting minutes) analyzed and incorporated into the historical record. But the process of converting the meeting minutes into data strongly recalls the original violence that accompanied the slave trade, when human lives—in fact, the very ancestors of these activists—were reduced to numbers and names. In recognition of this irreconcilable tension, the CCP requires that all those who download the corpus commit to a set of principles, including “a use of data that humanizes and acknowledges the Black people whose collective organizational histories are assembled” in the corpus, and a request to “contextualize and narrate the conditions of the people who appear as ‘data’ and to name them when possible.”
    There is a second tension that the CCP navigates in an exemplary fashion, which has to do with the content of the corpus itself. Because it is derived from the conventions’ official meeting minutes, it records only the “official” participants in the conventions and the discussions they initiated. These participants were almost exclusively men. To address this disparity, the CCP team asks its teaching partners to sign a Memo of Understanding (MoU) before introducing students to the project. The MoU requests that all instructors introduce a woman involved in the conventions, such as a wife, daughter, sister, or fellow church member, alongside every male delegate who is named (figure 4.9). From this work of recovery, the CCP is creating a second dataset of the women’s names—those who would otherwise go uncounted and therefore unrecognized for their work. They are using data collection to make these contributions count.
    An intersectional feminist approach to counting insists that we examine and, if necessary, rethink the assumptions and beliefs behind our classification infrastructure, as well as consistently probe who is doing the counting and whose interests are served. Counting and measuring do not always have to be tools of oppression. We can also use them to hold power accountable, to reclaim overlooked histories, and to build collectivity and solidarity. When we count within our own communities, with consideration and care, we can work to rebalance unequal distributions of power.
